---
title: An Explanation of CSS Architecture/Naming Conventions
---

<main>
    <header class="header-main">
        <h1>An Explanation of CSS Architecture/Naming Conventions (BEM, OOCSS, SMACSS)</h1>
        <time datetime="2018-11-21">OCTOBER 8, 2018</time>
    </header>
    <h2>What is BEM?</h2>
    <p>The BEM naming convention stands for <em>Block Element Modifier</em> and is currently the naming convention that
        8th Light sticks to. Reasons that people like this naming convention are because its name declares its purpose,
        thereby making it easier to skim markup and immediately understand how elements are styled or related to one
        another. The post is to keep the names simple, clear, and precise.</p>
    <div class="column">
        <h5 class="helper-space"><strong>THE GUIDELINES</strong></h5>
        <hr />
        <ol class="blogpost--ol-columns">
            <li>Names are written in lowercase</li>
            <li>Words are separated by a hyphen</li>
            <li>Block name defines the namespace for its elements and modifiers</li>
            <li>The element is separated from the block name by a double underscore</li>
            <li>The modifier name is separated from the block or element name by a single underscore</li>
            <li>The modifier value is separated from the modifier name by a single underscore, double hyphen, or period</li>
            <li>For boolean modifiers, the value is not included in the name</li>
        </ol>
        <h5 class="helper-space"><strong>BENEFITS</strong></h5>
        <hr />
        <ul class="blogpost--ul-columns">
            <li>Works nicely with React</li>
            <li>Naming things is easy</li>
            <li>No more classname conflicts</li>
            <li>Reusability out of the box</li>
            <li>No specificity races</li>
            <li>No unexpected side-effects</li>
            <li>Confidence in changing old css code</li>
        </ul>
    </div>

    <section>
        <h5 class="helper-space"><strong>HOW IT WORKS</strong></h5>
        <hr />
        <p>The block is the whole and the elements are the pieces.</p>
        <code>.block</code>
        <p>Each element is written after the block connected by two underscores.</p>
        <code>.block__element</code>
        <p>Modifiers are used to style a specific element and are usually separated by a double hyphen after the
            element
            like so:</p>
        <code>.block__elem--mod</code>
    </section>

    <section>
        <h2 class="helper-space">What is OOCSS?</h2>
        <p>OSCSS stands for <em>Object oriented CSS</em>. The object refers to any repeating visual pattern than can be
            specified in snippets of code. The goal of OOCSS is to produce components that are flexible, modular, and
            interchangeable.</p>

        <h5 class="helper-space"><strong>THE GUIDELINES</strong></h5>
        <hr />
        <ol class="blogpost--ol-indent">
            <li>Separation of Structure and Skin</li>
            <li>Separation of Container and Content</li>
        </ol>

        <h5 class="helper-space"><strong>STRUCTURE VS. SKIN</strong></h5>
        <hr />
        <p>The <strong>structure</strong> of an application refers to anything that is “invisible” to the user,
            such as
            instructions for element size and positioning. It refers to <strong>how things are laid out</strong>
            like:</p>
        <ol class="blogpost--ol-indent">
            <li>height and width</li>
            <li>margins and padding</li>
            <li>overflow</li>
        </ol>
        <p>The <strong>skin</strong> is something that users are generally more familiar with, as it refers to
            the
            visual properties of elements. It refers to <strong>what the layout looks like</strong>:</p>
        <ol class="blogpost--ol-columns">
            <li>colors</li>
            <li>fonts</li>
            <li>shadows</li>
            <li>gradients</li>
        </ol>

        <h5 class="helper-space"><strong>CONTAINER VS. CONTENT</strong></h5>
        <hr />
        <p><strong>Content</strong> refers to elements such as images, paragraphs, and div tags that are nested
            within
            other elements, which serve as containers.</p>

        <p><strong>Containers</strong> can be represented by a structure class.</p>
    </section>

    <section>
        <h2 class="helper-space">What is SMACSS?</h2>
        <p>SMACSS stands for <em>Scalable and Modular Architecture for CSS</em> and is more of a
            style guide than it is a rigid framework. The purpose of this category is to codify patterns, things that
            repeat themselves within our design, and avoid mixing code of several categories into a single file.</p>
        <div class="column">
            <h5 class="helper-space"><strong>THE GUIDELINES IN FIVE CATEGORIES</strong></h5>
            <hr />
            <ol class="blogpost--ol-columns">
                <li><strong>Base:</strong> These are default values, so things like padding, margin border, font and
                    other
                    properties that are used on the entire website and all elements.</li>
                <li><strong>Layout:</strong> Divides a page into sections with elements like header, footer, and
                    article.
                    Often developers show layout elements by prefixing the class with l, i.e.`l-header` or `l-footer`</li>
                <li><strong>Modules:</strong> The reusable, modular elements in the design like the navbar, sidebar,
                    and
                    elements that are repeated on the site.</li>
                <li><strong>State:</strong> Describes how our modules or layouts will look when they are in a
                    particular
                    state (i.e. active, inactive, expanded, hidden). These are usually prefixed with `is-`. Examples
                    would
                    be: `is-active`, `is-inactive`, `is-expanded`, and `is-hidden`</li>
                <li><strong>Theme:</strong> Similar to state rules in that they describe how modules or layouts might
                    look.
                    However, it is more applicable for larger sites with shared elements that look different
                    throughout,
                    such as color scheme or type treatment.</li>
            </ol>

            <h5 class="helper-space"><strong>THE GOALS</strong></h5>
            <hr />
            <ol class="blogpost--ol-columns">
                <li>Repetition results in less code</li>
                <li>Easier maintenance</li>
                <li>Greater consistency in the user experience</li>
            </ol>
        </div>
    </section>
</main>