---
title: Understanding the Design Process
time: December 28, 2018
---

<main class='blogposts__container'>
  <header class='header-main'>
    <h1>Understanding the Design Process</h1>
    <time datetime="2018-12-28">December 28, 2018</time>
  </header>
  <p>What they never tell you in design school is that part of being a good creative is having strong skills in communication, interpersonal relationships, and writing. Ew, business-y stuff. Yes, the rumors are true and as much as the thought of human contact makes you cringe, even as a creative you will have to work with and deal with a variety of people, personalities, and working methods.</p>

  <p>The main purpose of design is to sell. It's no secret that having strong business skills is just as important. Aesthetics matter but can quickly become disposable if the product fails to target the right audience and meet business needs. What good is the work if it's beautiful but not functional and useful? The same applies vice versa. Good design does both, so that the final product can sell itself even when the ones who made it are not there to pitch it.</p>

<h2>The Design Process</h2>
<hr/>
  <p>Traditionally, it looks something like this:</p>
    <ol class='blogpost--ol-indent'>
      <li>Define</li>
      <li>Research</li>
      <li>Ideate</li>
      <li>Refine</li>
      <li>Develop</li>
      <li>Execute</li>
      <li>Revise</li>
      <li>Deliver</li>
    </ol>


<h2>Define</h2>
<hr/>
  <p>Every project should start with a creative brief. You can think of the brief as an invisible contract, an outline, or an agreement between clients and creatives (no signatures required though). The brief helps to create more organization and universal understanding of client business goals and needs across different teams internally. This is especially helpful when your team members may be juggling between a variety of other clients with their teams, tasks, and projects. The end product is only as strong as the creative brief established from the beginning. The methods that internal teams use to execute on the client's business goals aren't as important, so long as it's through ethical means and every method is done with intention relating back to the brief. It's your new bible.</p>

<h3 class='helper-space-top-small'><strong>The Brief Basics</strong></h3>
<hr/>
<ol class='blogpost--ol-indent'>
  <li><strong>Background Overview / History —</strong> Before you can design anything, you need to understand the who, what, where, when, and why.</li>
  <li><strong>Target Audience — </strong>Who are they speaking to?</li>
  <li><strong>Competitors — </strong>Who are their primary and secondary competitors?</li>
  <li><strong>Objective / Goals — </strong>What are your client's business goals? This can be as specific as increasing engagement by x% in the next 4 months to as vague as wanting to expand in the next 3 years.</li>
  <li><strong>The Message — </strong>What are they trying to communicate to their audience? What do they want the audience to do?</li>
  <li><strong>Challenges — </strong>What pain points does your audience face that prevents them from being a user?</li>
  <li><strong>Selling Points — </strong>What are you promising your audience?</li>
  <li><strong>Support Points — </strong> What facts are you going to use to defend each of your selling points?</li>
  <li><strong>Channels — </strong>Through what mediums will  your users interact with your work?</li>
  <li><strong>Tagline or Theme — </strong>Taglines are usually 5–7 words. There are exceptions that come with brand recognition, such as Nike's classic mantra, <em>Just Do it.</em></li>
  <li><strong>Deliverables and Deadlines —</strong> List what you are expected to deliver and when. If there's ever a dispute as to what is expected, the brief sets the tone.</li>
</ol>

<h2>Discover</h2>
<hr/>
<p>For branding, there's an additional step that follows the brief, which is a set of questions that you could call The Discovery Phase. Although similar to the brief, these questions do feature more depth and a set of unique ones, such as asking the client to provide examples of brands in the world that they hate or aspire to emulate with reasons behind their choices.</p>

<p>One of the most important questions from the discovery phase is what words the client uses to describe the business, which should be in no more than 3–5 words. It's quality over quantity and it's imperative to the rest of the design process to ask each of the stakeholders individually what those words mean to them and why they chose them specifically. The goal is to understand what the client is asking for and if their asks align with what they actually need.</p>

<p>"Innovative" to a designer might be translating that word into vibrant colors to express assertiveness, confidence in who you are enough to be emboldened to show it. On the other hand, "innovative" could mean activism to one stakeholder and groundbreaking to another or even just relating back to their existing product in some way, where bright colors might not even be suitable in the first place. Is the audience they seek to target their current one, a group that they hope to reach, or are they striving to connect with both, which means the creative team is playing a balancing act?</p>

<p>These are all details that are important to know in order to prevent the worse case scenario: wasted time and executed work that does not actually meet the business goals, does not successfully create brand or product differentiation in the market unique to their competitors, and establishes little to no emotional connection with their audience to drive brand loyalty. Ultimately, an unhappy team and a deeply unsatisfied client.</p>

<h2>Research</h2>
<hr/>
<p>Good design always starts with research. You can tackle research in a set of different ways, but always start with their competitors.</p>
  <ul class='blogpost--ul'>
    <li><strong>Create a Brand Audit —</strong>Look into competitors and how they express their brand across different mediums, applications, and platforms to tell their story. Take notes and screenshots of their website or app, animations, social accounts, color palette, typography, etc.</li>
    <li><strong>Research the Existing Market —</strong>Find out what's out there and take notes or screenshots. What's the most predictable or common thing that seems to appear everywhere? Similar to how you can't write about a topic you know nothing about, you can't design anything unique and tailor the experience to reach a specific audience if you don't know what's already out there.</li>
    <li><strong>Learn more about the Product, Service, or Business—</strong>You can't design effectively if you don't know what it looks like, what it does, how it works, and how current users feel about it.</li>
    <li><strong>Make a list of keywords or phrases—</strong>I find this particularly helpful for just getting your ideas somewhere on paper that can be developed into tag lines, icons, themes, or even just considering the first set of keywords that your user could type into a search box and how your company can use SEO to their advantage. Starting to think about all the possible directions that you can take is a great place to start.</li>
  </ul>

<h2>Ideate</h2>
<hr/>
<p>Every creative's favorite part. After the hard research comes the more visual research. Start with mood boards, an abstract collection of inspiration imagery that reflects what a brand could look like by featuring possible color palettes, patterns, typography, design elements, and photography styles that communicate a personality and lifestyle.</p>

<p>The Digital Age might be the new black, but inspiration takes many forms, some of which you can only experience beyond the screen. The world is your oyster, so think big and don't limit yourself. Consider looking at fabrics, textures, magazines, papers, objects, and just looking at things that inspire you. After you've garnered a fair amount of inspiration, it's time to sift through them. Ideally, you should aim to tailor down to about 9–12 concise images that reflect the lifestyle that the brand is trying to sell to their target audience. If you cannot explain or defend your reasons for choosing an image and how it relates back to the brand or the target audience, it's a clear sign that it shouldn't be on the board.</p>
<p>For mood boards, the traditional standard is to create 3 mood boards with varying looks and feels to present to your client. Sometimes it helps to give them descriptive names similar to how you would give names for personas. Often times, the client might like a combination of elements from different boards and may request to combine them somehow, which is perfectly fine because you get closer to understanding what styles they love or hate. It's either they choose a combination of smaller elements from the boards, or ideally, select one board to move forward with because "I want everything" is not an option.</p>

<h2>Refine</h2>
<hr/>
<p>This is the phase where you start getting your hands dirty, sketching rough compositions, and using your mood boards and screenshots as the source of inspiration in how you might think about applying styles throughout. You may find yourself researching during this phase as well because depending on the deliverable (i.e. a brochure), as you may need additional help thinking outside the box, pushing beyond the expected, and finding nuances that make for a great twist in showcasing the predictable in an unexpected, clever way.</p>
<blockquote><strong>Rule of thumb:</strong> Your first set of ideas are almost <em>never</em> the best ones.</blockquote> 
<p>They always say that the struggle is real and that things that are worth it never come easy. The same goes for great ideas. It's when you're struggling after having created over 20 sketches that you come up with your best ones. Embrace that struggle because it's the road less traveled and leads to more engaging, evocative work.</p>

<h2>Develop</h2>
<hr/>
<p>During this phase, you are presenting your rough sketches and your ideas either to your colleagues or to your clients. Consider this an introduction to your first pitch. You're painting a picture of the story that you're trying to tell and explaining your rationale behind each concept as it relates to the brand and business goals. This is the phase where you start to sell your ideas, so that you can move forward with executing only the best, strongest, most interesting ones. Usually, you should have three different concepts to move forward with.</p>
<p>Feedback and collaboration is important, regardless of whether it be from your internal team or from the clients themselves. It's important to ask the right questions. After reading <em>Design is a Job</em> by Mike Monteiro based on my mentor's recommendation, one of my key takeaways was that asking subjective questions like, "Do you like it?" will only get you subjective answers.It's important to ask better questions to get the answers you need, such as, <strong>Does this successfully meet the business goals?</strong>, <strong>What would make this stronger?</strong>, or <strong>What about this isn't successfully meeting business goals?</strong></p>
<p>Also, don't underestimate the feedback that you can receive from non-designers. Although some comments can be taken with a grain of salt or are not always applicable, be respectful of other people's feedback and opinions. You'd be surprised about how feedback from non-designers can be some of the most insightful just because it comes from a fresh pair of eyes and a different perspective. Remember that although you are the designer, more often than not, the products that you create are being used by a wide variety of people - yes, that's right, including non-designers.</p>

<h2>Execute</h2>
<hr/>
<p>Here's where the strong technical skills come in. Your execution is just as important as your delivery. This is the phase where you translate your rough sketches into digital compositions and start playing with color distribution, design elements, blending modes and photo effects, and consider the principles of design (repetition, contrast, emphasis, balance, scale/proportion, proximity, harmony, and rhythm/movement).</p>

<h2>Revise</h2>
<hr/>
  <p>Once again feedback is important, whether it be from your team or your client. During this stage, you should have three nearly or fully executed concepts to present in a variety of applications to get feedback on. It's especially important during this stage to get the feedback you need because this is the last step before the final delivery, which could be in print or digital formats. It's crucial that typos are addressed, that compositions are communicating the intended message, that there is consistency reflected across all the applications through type and color usage, that design elements are not misaligned or not properly scaled to proportion, and that there are no missing, required elements such as logos of the client's sponsors or the tagline. Ensure that the applications can stand equally strong independently as they can as a collective whole.</p>

<h2>Deliver</h2>
<hr/>
<p>Execution matters but so does your delivery. Although excellent work always speak for itself, it's still important to frame that story for your stakeholders. A good way to get your ideas together is writing down your rationale behind the concepts and pieces. You should be able to explain how the user will encounter each application, why you selected that particular one and how it ties back to the client's business goals and the larger scheme. When putting together your presentation, it's important to consider sequence, pacing, and balance. Be intentional about the work you show and the order in which you show it: too much and the audience is overwhelmed with content to process, whereas too little and the audience is deprived of the context needed to understand and fully engage with the work. Well, there you have it, folks! Design is hard and so is being a creative. Thanks for reading my Ted Talk! 😉</p>
</main>