---
title: UX Case Study&#58; The Path to Mastery
time: November 8, 2018
---

<main class='blogposts__container'>
  <header class='header-main'>
    <h1>User Experience (UX) Case Study:<br> The Path to Mastery</h1>
    <time datetime="2018-11-08">November 8, 2018</time>
  </header>
  <p>8th Light is a consulting firm specializing in custom software development. The company is most well-known for
    delivering quality software development professionals and its Apprenticeship Program, where they teach and train
    aspiring software development professionals from various technical backgrounds. Established back in 2006, the
    apprenticeship curriculum has undergone numerous trial and errors, as well as constant revisions with little
    documentation on how the overall quality of the learning experience and the program have improved.</p>

  <p>Given its long history of evolution, my colleague and I were approached by a determined stakeholder who shared his
    own understanding of the problem: the apprenticeship curriculum currently exists as tribal knowledge, which
    resulting in inconsistent standards and anxiety amongst apprentices. Undergoing the user experience design process,
    my colleague and I dedicated two weeks to assess our stakeholder's theory, define the problem, and come up with an
    appropriate solution. Here's what the process:</p>

  <section>
    <h4><strong>MY ROLE</strong></h4>
    <hr />
    <p>On this team of two, I served a mixture of primary and supplementary roles:</p>
    <ul class="blogpost--ul">
      <li>Note-taker during user interviews and documented user interview answers in a spreadsheet</li>

      <li>Contributed to strategy, affinity mapping, and synthesizing research.</li>

      <li>Helped to develop problem statements and How Might We... Statements</li>

      <li>Designed and pitched the final presentation to our stakeholder.</li>
    </ul>
  </section>

  <section class="helper-space-top-small">
    <div class="blogpost__number-circle">
      <span class="blogpost__number-dot">1</span>
      <h4 class="helper-space-left"><strong>THE RESEARCH PLAN</strong></h4>
    </div>
    <hr />

    <h4>User Interviews</h4>

    <h4>Problem Statements</h4>
    <h4>Hypothesis</h4>


    <h4>Method</h4>
  </section>

  <section class="helper-space-top-small">
    <div class="blogpost__number-circle">
      <span class="blogpost__number-dot">2</span>
      <h4 class="helper-space-left"><strong>THE PROBLEM</strong></h4>
    </div>
    <hr />

    <p><strong>[Apprentices]</strong> feel [frustration] about unclear expectations. They want to define those
      expectations but face
      [reluctance to speak up or reach out].</p>

    <p><strong>[Mentors]</strong> feel [uncertainty] about understanding success metrics. They need [to document and
      share how they use
      the
      curriculum] but lack the structure to do so.</p>
  </section>

  <section class="helper-space-top-small">
    <div class="blogpost__number-circle">
      <span class="blogpost__number-dot">3</span>
      <h4 class="helper-space-left"><strong>THE SOLUTION</strong></h4>
    </div>
    <hr />
    Our solution is an unlinked extension of the 8th Light website, similar to our style guide.
  </section>
</main>