---
title: Pairing Tour — Day 01

time: February 18, 2019
---

<main class='blogposts__container'>
  <header class='header-main'>
    <h1>Pairing Tour — Day 01</h1>
    <time datetime="2019-02-18">February 18, 2019</time>
  </header>

<p>Today officially marks the start of my pairing tours! This week is primarily dedicated to pairing with members of the design team at 8th Light. Since the design team works together—more often than not—on certain projects according to client need, there will be an overlap of working with other design team members simultaneously.</p>

<p>Today I paired with Alexa Albanese, who has been at 8th Light for the past two years now specializing in UX design and research. Additionally, I worked with two other members of the design team: Kevin Zolk and Kelly Rauwerdink. For context, here’s a quick background on each member:</p>

<blockquote>
<p><strong>Kevin Zolk</strong> is a Chicago based senior designer and developer, who likes to focus primarily on interaction design but also happens to be a talented visual designer and front-end developer.</p>

<p><strong>Kelly Rauwerdink</strong> is a Madison based illustrator, art director, and designer specializing in branding. She is originally from a different company called Adorable. When 8th Light acquired Adorable, Kelly became a part of the team.</p>
</blockquote>


<p>Alexa and I paired on a client account that she, Kevin, and Kelly have been on for some time now (translation: months) tackling visual design (branding), UI design, and soon, implementation into code. The account has two stakeholders who are seeking to create a desktop app for issuers, investors, and advisors to help ease the stress and confusion of the overall investing process. However, the ride’s been rocky due to the complexity of the project.</p>

<p>The investing app involves various third parties that communicate between each other: banks, tax documents, and entities that update the stakeholders on where their investors are in the process, all the while communicating directly with the investors accessing the app. Unfortunately, I knew long before pairing with them that Kevin, Alexa, and Kelly had faced difficulties with their internal working dynamics as a team and the clients themselves. Earlier in the process, our team learned quickly that one of the stakeholders was particular about the visual design and UI design. It sounded as though he struggled to focus on the bigger picture and became fixated on smaller details whenever given the opportunity to give feedback. Witnessing our team in distress, made me wonder just how much I could actually contribute or help with their working processes.</p>

<p>Briefly before our pairing session, Alexa reviewed her work with Kevin, where he provided some constructive feedback and a list of things that he felt she and I could tackle together. Amongst the items on that list that we tackled were: typography spacing, three folder elements, progress bar, invitations bar, and color.</p>

<h4><strong>TYPOGRAPHY SPACING</strong></h4> 
<hr />
<p>This was just to make the spacing consistent between different elements.</p>

<h4><strong>THREE FOLDER ELEMENTS</strong></h4>
<hr />
<p>These components were similar to icons except they contained text that defined which documents needed action or how many people were using the desktop app.</p>

<h4><strong>PROGRESS BAR</strong></h4>
<hr />
<p>This component showed where the investors are in the overall process of investing. It showed the different steps, along with subtasks to accomplish those steps.</p>

<h4><strong>INVITATIONS BAR</strong></h4>
<hr />
<p>This bar was basically a visual graph of the database. The graph would show how many invitations were pending, how many are in each step of the process, and which ones were already completed. This bar would constantly change according to what is in the database.</p>

<h4><strong>COLOR PALETTE</strong></h4>
<hr />
<p>Kevin proposed incorporating a gold color because there was not enough contrast between the different shades of blue.
Although this client did not happen to like the addition of gold amongst the other shades of blue, they really liked our solution for the Invitations Bar, as it would successfully account for the constantly changing information on their database. For example, what happens when there’s 1 deal in process vs. having 100 deals in process?</p>

<p>In addition to this client, I attended a development demo with Alexa’s other client, a company selling a phone app for grocery deliveries. This one was not as exciting but definitely important and useful in getting familiarized with the development team working processes at 8th Light. I learned that they use Jira, a point system for time estimation, and that they separate their work into stories. From my understanding, stories refer to breaking the work up into more manageable chunks to divide it between the development team.</p>
</main>