---
title: Pairing Tour — Day 05
time: February 22, 2019
---

<main class='blogposts__container'>
  <header class='header-main'>
    <h1>Pairing Tour — Day 05</h1>
    <time datetime="2019-02-22">February 22, 2019</time>
  </header>

<p>Today I paired with Kyle Sparks, who is Communications Manager here at 8th Light. Kyle generally works on writing for internal requests, such as for proposals and presentations. He’s also very familiar with the GitHub workflow, along with coding skills in HTML, CSS, Ruby, and yaml.</p>

<p>Pairing with Kyle is always enjoyable because he completes work with a sense of humor, lightheartedness, and professionalism. He came prepared this morning with a list of three things that he had coordinated on with Lydia Lindenberg, our Marketing Manager:</p>

<ol class="blogpost--ol-indent">
  <li>Fix a simple social media link issue for 8th Light’s upcoming events on our website, so that when a site visitor clicked on “Facebook” or “Twitter,” they would be redirected to our company’s social accounts.</li>
  
  <li>Figure out possible layouts to address a specific section of our company’s homepage that displayed our services. According to research, users were unclear about what exactly our company does, despite having a section dedicated to what we do.</li>

  <li>Add a section with a button on the company’s main blockchain services page that would direct users to the field guide download page.</li>
  
  <li>An additional but not absolutely necessary task that Kyle wanted to tackle was our company’s email design for the weekly bytes. We glazed over this point only as an introduction to some future work that Kyle might need help with.</li>
</ol>

<p>Kyle began our pairing by introducing me to the 8th Light codebase, which was way more familiar and manageable than the HubSpot workflow. He was careful and conscious about mansplaining, which I really appreciated, and made sure to let me know that I could interrupt him if I already knew something. He instructed me on some commands in terminal for cloning the repository and opening up in my text editor of choice: Visual Studio Code.</p>

<p>We were quick to fix the link issue and then moved on to addressing possible layouts for the section of the company’s homepage that would focus on our selling points. I worked in Sketch, ensuring to manage expectations and state that I cannot design and code at the same time. I created a few different wireframe layouts, attempting to stay consistent with our brand’s (informal) website style guide and referencing with Kyle what the other landing page headers look like. He seemed excited and interested in learning Sketch, where I suggested that I could teach him one of these days during waza, a brand specific term at our company that refers to a dedicated time slot to professional development, learning new skills, and/or working on side projects.</p>

<p>Once I finished the possible layouts in Sketch, we reached out to Lydia to ask for her feedback. At the time, she was in a meeting, so we then moved onto another task, which was creating the section with the button for the blockchain services landing page. Although this seemed simple, the challenge came with using the HubSpot interface, where related things feel so disconnected across the site in terms of the UX. The basic thing that Kyle and I had accomplished was placing the section and button underneath the header, but the problem was that the background color of that section was purple—so was the header.</p>

<p>The problem was trying to change that background to the lightest shade of gray in our style guide and change the text to be a darker shade of gray to match the rest of the brand. We had tackled it for roughly a half hour to no avail before Lydia dropped by after her meeting, we discussed my wireframe layouts, and selected the layout that we felt was the best balance between our brand and creating something new.</p>

<p>Here’s where things got a bit messy in terms of scheduling. I was contacted by Jim Remsik, one of our Directors of Software Services, who works out of the office in Madison with Kelly. He happened to be in the Chicago office for the day and was seeking to sync with me over coffee. He wanted to address a discussion that I had with Kelly the day prior just about my apprenticeship, my professional goals, my perspective on what is happening with a design director or our company’s growing pains, and the type of projects that I would like 8th Light to bring more of into the pipeline.</p>

<p>By this point, Kyle had been struggling and frustrated with HubSpot, where he tried calling Kelly via slack for assistance with working in the design system manager. Although Kelly hasn’t touched much of code since she came to 8th Light because she’s been more focused on addressing projects related to visual design, she was still able to help, guide, and instruct Kyle on how to make the changes. She helped Kyle solve the problem in a reasonable timeframe.</p>

<p>For the last task, which was coding the selected wireframe that me, Lydia, and Kyle agreed upon, I had interrupted my pairing session to grab coffee and have a discussion with Jim Remsik. By the time that I returned, Kyle and I had just enough time to start incorporating the header of the wireframe that I created but not to complete the section entirely because the task did not have a hard deadline or of high priority.</p>
</main>
