---
title: Pairing Tour — Day 07
time: February 26, 2019
---

<main class='blogposts__container'>
  <header class='header-main'>
    <h1>Pairing Tour — Day 07</h1>
    <time datetime="2019-02-26">February 26, 2019</time>
  </header>

<p>Unfortunately, we had a change of plans today. My assigned mentor, Eva Penzeymoog, was feeling under the weather. In addition to being my mentor, Eva is a UX designer at 8th Light, an instructor who teaches UX at General Assembly, a proud feminist, and a career-driven woman in technology seeking to level up in her career through a new direction: giving conference talks on inclusive safety. Basically, she’s an all-around amazing human being both on and off the clock.</p>

<p>Once again I paired with Kyle Sparks, Kelly Rauwerdink, and Julia Murray. For my pairing with Kyle, we tackled together the codebase for 8th Light’s homepage, trying to take a wireframe that I created and convert a component into code. I started out flying solo in the morning because Kyle had a meeting. When we regrouped to discuss what I had done thus far, he came with a better new idea for our header image: what if we kept the video on our homepage but have that playing in the background with a faded color overlay and text on top?</p>

<p>In my professional opinion, the video speaks more to what our company does, as well as brings a sense of humanity and warmth back to the cold, calculated perception of “custom software development” or “technology.” Navigating through stylesheets, code, and identifying pieces of code to repurpose and reuse took a little longer than expected, but together we managed to get it done in a reasonable timeframe. To finish it off, we made a pull request and opened it up for feedback from the design team, where Julia suggested to adjust the type weight for contrast, bump up the overlay, and consider type size for responsive design on desktop because it matched the rest of the site.</p>

<p>Following my pairing with Kyle, I continued my work with Kelly and Julia, taking a new swing at laying out a high-fidelity UI wireframe based of Julia’s research and low-fidelity ones. I explored a possible layout for an <strong>About Us</strong> page of this client’s website. As expected, my first swing was not the best. The difficulties posed by the color palette, the legibility of the text, and some of the pre-established styles supported a “boxy” layout, so I created other iterations and asked Kelly for feedback.</p>

<p>By this point, we had a meeting with the ad agency team and had received more feedback and revisions, but this time, received a lot more positively because they seemed more engaged with the work. To finish off today, I received Kelly’s feedback, made her edits, and placed two versions of my high-fidelity wireframes up on our Trello workflow board.</p>
</main>
