---
title: Pairing Tour — Day 00

time: February 15, 2019
---

<main class='blogposts__container'>
  <header class='header-main'>
    <h1>Pairing Tour — Day 00</h1>
    <time datetime="2019-02-15">February 15, 2019</time>
  </header>

<p>Currently, I work as a design apprentice at 8th Light, a consulting firm specializing in custom software development. I started back in mid-September 2018, where I began my six month journey of learning front-end development and user experience (UX) for the first time to complement my existing skill sets in user interface (UI) and visual design.</p>

<p>The <strong>pairing tour</strong> at my company is a 2–week introduction to the client space of projects and work environments, understanding different team member roles and internal working processes, applying the learnings that the apprentice has gained, and just generally developing a stronger sense of familiarity and camaraderie amongst professional relationships.</p>

<p>In an effort to learn more about the sales process and pitching design in the client space, today I had my first pairing tour with our busy Director of Software Services, Kevin Kotowski. Since his list of potential and current clients on deck were not heavily design-related, Kevin instead included me in a meeting with one of the company’s potential clients still in the deal process.</p>

<p>This client was a startup with other business-related happenings in the background (as most startups have) on top of restructuring their company and having back and forth conversations with their potential client. This startup was seeking further consultation on code architecture, custom code that could alter according to customer needs, and portability in terms of offering cloud services to their clients that may have clients of their own. Although this client meeting was not design focused, it was so interesting to see how conversations in engagements are had during the deal-making process and how questions are framed. The meeting concluded with the client expressing interest but providing an update of his timeline, which would be 1–2 months later from today.</p>

<p>In terms of 8th Light’s offerings, I assumed it was obvious what a designer “does.” However, this client had still asked about the designer’s role in the context of this project. Kevin provided an in-depth explanation of how designers were responsible for a number of things: user interviews, look and feel through UI, wireframing, prototyping, user testing, front-end code implementation, and generally to ease the overall implementation process by working with developer teams. Basically, he explained to the client how the role of designer in this context meant “UI/UX” as opposed to branding.</p>

<p>Post-meeting he explained that the reason that this client asked about the designer’s role is because Kevin had listed the price in the proposal for a full-time designer as a line item. Since this client was seeking to keep prices relatively low, he explained that 8th Light was competing with another company in Argentina who happens to offer the same services for a cheaper price. Although this pairing was not design focused, it was still a valuable learning experience in terms of better understanding the sales process, assessing the client’s needs, and positioning 8th Light’s services in the best way possible.</p>
</main>